Continuing Education Programme (CEP) on “Advanced
Piezoelectric Materials and Devices”

Solid State Physics Laboratory (SSPL), DRDO, Delhi, September 17-19, 2025

Determination of electromechanical parameters of piezoelectric ceramics using vector impedance spectroscopy

Dr Anoop Kumar Shukla, Associate Professor, Department of Physics, Amity Institute of Applied Sciences,
Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, G B Nagar. E Mail: akshukla@amity.edu


Contents


Piezoelectric effect
Vector – Impedance Characterization of a Piezoelectric Radial Mode Resonator
Evaluation of electromechanical parameters through equivalent circuit analysis
Evaluation of electromechanical parameters through direct measurement of series and parallel resonance frequencies
Comparison of results obtained from two approaches
Some ongoing work on lead-free materials materials in our group
Few applications of piezoelectric materials


	Piezoelectric Effect	

Discovered in 1880 by the brothers Pierre Curie and Jacques Curie
There are certain materials which become polarized under mechanical stress
A potential difference is created due to mechanical stress applied in certain directions
Piezoelectric Effect: Pressure – Electricity
Material must be non-centrosymmetric
Quartz, Lithium Niobate, Barium Titanate, Lead Zirconate Titanate

	Direct piezoelectric effect (Generator Action)	



Change in surface charge density due to applied mechanical
stress
Contraction and elongation of material produce opposite charges on a particular face
The developed polarization is directly proportional to the stress
First order approximation
𝐷 = 𝑑𝑇, d is piezoelectric charge constant
D is dielectric displacement (C/m2), T is applied stress (N/m2)
d is charge constant (C/N)

	Mechanical to Electrical Energy Conversion	


Centrosymmetric crystals do not produce polarization under mechanical stress
After compression or elongation, the center of symmetry does not change and hence P = 0
Consider a non-centrosymmetric hexagonal unit cell
F = 0, the centers of mass for positive and negative ions
coincide.
F is applied in Y-direction centers of mass for positive and negative ions shift leading to a net dipole moment P along y.
F is applied along X, which may not produce net dipole moment in X-direction











A



O


B


(a)















P = 0












y






A''








B''














x







P = 0
P




(c)






















(b)

The net dipole moment may be observed along Y-direction
Picture courtesy From Principles of Electronic Materials and Devices, Third Edition, S.O. Kasap (© McGraw-Hill, 2005)

	Piezoelectric Coupling Coefficients	

The piezoelectric materials convert the mechanical energy to electrical energy
Application of electric field produces mechanical strain in the piezoelectric
material
Piezoelectric materials are electromechanical transducers
The	energy	conversion	in	piezoelectric	materials	is	characterized	by
piezoelectric coupling factor (k)

𝑘2 = 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜 𝑚𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦	or
𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦

𝑘2 = 𝑚𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜 𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦
𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 𝑚𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦


	Efficiency and charge constant	





	Piezoelectric voltage constant	

The induced electric field E in the material is related to the applied stress T
Parameter relating E and T is known as piezoelectric
voltage constant (g)
The voltage constant is defined as 𝑔 =	𝑑
𝗌𝑜𝗌𝑟
The piezoelectric voltage constant is important figure of merit for electromechanical sensor applications and piezoelectric energy harvesting devices

	Converse Piezoelectric Effect (Motor Action)	





A mechanical strain is observed under application of an
electric field
Material	exhibit	expansion	or	contraction	depending upon the direction of the electric field
The strain is directly proportional to the applied field
𝑆 = 𝑑𝐸
d is piezoelectric charge constant (m/V)










V0



𝑑 =
𝑆Τ𝐸 =
𝐷Τ𝑇same for both direct and converse effects

	Piezoelectric constitutive equations	


In	piezoelectric	effect,	the	elastic	variables	(T	and	S)are	related	to	the electrical variable (D and E)
The constitutive equations for direct and converse piezoelectric effects can be expressed as
𝑫 = 𝒅𝑻 + 𝜺𝑻𝑬, here 𝜺𝑻is the permittivity under constant stress (usually zero)
𝑺 = 𝒔𝑬𝑻 + 𝒅𝑬, here 𝒔𝑬is the elastic compliance under constant electric field (usually zero)

	Polarization and electric displacement tensors	








	Piezoelectric Coefficient tensor	

Application of a mechanical stress T produces a strain S and
Z	3
electrical polarization P
Similarly application of an electric field E causes an electric polarization P and strain S
𝑃𝑖 = σ𝑗 𝑑𝑖𝑗𝑇𝑗, 𝑆𝑖𝑗 = σ𝑖 𝑑𝑖𝑗𝐸𝑖, (i = 1,2,3, j=1,2,3,4,5,6)
A	piezoelectric	material	can	be	described	by	a	matrix	of
electromechanical coefficient
Piezoelectric coefficients, elastic constants, and permittivity are	1
all tensors	X	4
Permittivity- Second Rank, Piezoelectric Coefficient-Third Rank
and Elastic compliance-Fourth Rank tensors
Axes notation, Cartesian System X-, Y- and Z- are 1, 2 and 3
The shear effects are represented as 4, 5 and 6






Vector Impedance Characterization of a Piezoelectric Ceramic Resonator

Impedance/Admittance-Phase measurement






Material: Pb(Zr0.57, Ti0.43)O3 + 6 at % of lanthanum

Characteristic frequencies of a piezoelectric resonator





Frequencies fm & fn corresponds to minimum and maximum impedance
Frequencies at which reactance Xe = 0, are the resonant and anti-resonant frequencies fr & fa


	








Evaluation of electromechanical parameters using equivalent circuit analysis

Equivalent circuit of a piezoelectric resonator




R


G	  1
L	b
b




Ca



R – Motional resistance	L – Motional inductance
Rb – Shunt resistance



Ca– Motional capacitance
Cb– Shunt capacitance

Simulated values of piezoelectric equivalent circuit parameters R, L, Ca, Cb and Rb
for fundamental radial mode and its overtone



Significance of equivalent circuit parameters



R represents mechanical dissipation of the piezoelectric resonator.
L represents mass transformed into electrical magnitude by piezoelectric effect.
Ca represents elastic compliance transformed into electrical magnitude by piezoelectric effect.
Cb	is the capacitance in the absence of mechanical deformations at the concerned frequency of
resonance
Rb is the loss associated with Cb
In general, these parameters are independent of frequency
This is true only for a narrow range of frequencies near the resonance frequency

Determination of electromechanical parameters according to IEEE std.

For Gb→0 the impedance of this circuit is given


Z	=



=  Z ∠θ
= Re + jXe

Capacitive ratio r = CbൗC
R


G	  1

M =
= 1Τ
L	b
b


ωs = 2π fs =
Ca
ωp = 2π fp = ωs


(Proc. IRE 45, 354(1957))


Determination of electromechanical parameters according to IEEE std.


The planar coupling coefficient KP can be determined

  K2
1−K2 =
Here ∆fps =fp-fs. J0 & J1 are the Bessel function of first kind and zero order and first order
E is the Poisson’s ratio


φ is the lowest positive root of the equation
J1
= φJ0

The roots of this equation are related the resonant frequencies of fundamental and overtones of
radial mode of the thin circular discs.
2	2
The coupling coefficient K31 can be determined as K	= 0.5



(Proc. IRE 49, 1161(1961))

Determination of electromechanical parameters according to IEEE std.

The elastic compliance can be calculated from

1	4π2a2f 2 1 − σE2	ρ
E	=	φ2
11
Here ‘a’ is the radius of the disk and ‘’ is the density of the material


The piezoelectric strain constant d31
= K31
1Τ2

Hydrostatic piezoelectric strain constant dh = d33 + 2d31


Piezoelectric voltage constants g31 =
d31Τε0εT	, g33 =
d33Τε0εT



Acoustical velocity V2 = 1Τ
11	ρ



Here 𝜀𝑇	is the dielectric constant and d
is negative

Calculation of Poisson’s ratio


Poisson’s ratio can be calculated from the ratio of resonance frequencies of fundamental and first overtone
σE = −



J1

3
= φJ0
2




φiV

1	2
2 1Τ2	1

ωφi =
a	1 − 3 γiφi
, Where γi=1 for all ’s.	0



•


2
=



2


-1





-2





-3
0	2	4	6	8	10	12







Evaluation of electromechanical parameters through
direct measurement of fs and fp

Direct measurement of fs, fp and calculation of electromechanical parameters

At the series resonant frequency fs, real part of	𝜔	is maximum

At parallel resonant frequency fp, the real part of ωZ
is maximum



 
S. Sherrit, N. Gautheir, H. D. Wiederick and B. K. Mukherjee, Ferroelectrics. 119, 17 (1991).

Direct measurement of fs, fp and calculation of electromechanical parameters


The admittance of radial resonator is given as



𝑌
−jω ε0𝗌𝑝	πa2
=
𝑡
− 1 ,	𝐽
= xJ0 𝑥
𝐽1 𝑥
,	𝑥 =	ωa


Once the 𝜎𝑝 and p are known 𝑘𝑝 can be determined from


2 =
2








IEEE Standards on Piezoelectricity, 176 (1978).

Direct measurement of fs, fp and calculation of electromechanical parameters





Knowing fs
and fp
of the fundamental and first harmonic 𝜎𝑝and 𝑐𝑝	can be determined by the non-linear


least square polynomial fits of the equations
𝜂 = 𝑎0 + 𝑎1𝑟𝑠 + 𝑎2𝑟2 + 𝑎3	3


𝜎𝑝 = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1𝑟𝑠 + 𝑏
𝑟2 + 𝑏
𝑟3 + 𝑏
𝑟4



The coefficients {an, bn} are taken from Table I of Sherrit et al. [7] and rs is defined as 𝑟𝑠 =
𝑓𝑠
ൗ𝑓𝑠




𝜂 can be evaluated from 𝜂 = 2π f𝑠
0 𝑎
1Τ2

Direct measurement of fs, fp and calculation of electromechanical parameters



Poisson’s ratio 𝜎𝑝, radial mode coupling coefficient 𝑘𝑝, piezoelectric constant 𝑒𝑝	, dielectric constant 𝜀𝑝	and
31	33
and mechanical constants 𝑐𝑝	are defined as



𝜎𝑝 =
−𝑠𝐸
ൗ𝑠𝐸	, 𝜀𝑝
2
= 𝜀′ −	31	, 𝑐𝑝
𝐸
=	11	,

12	11
33
𝗌0
11	2−	2




𝑒𝑝	=	𝑑31

,
𝑝	2
2 =	𝑒31	,

31	𝑠𝐸	+𝑠𝐸
𝗌0𝗌𝑝	𝑐𝑝

11	12
33 11

The planar coupling coefficient KP as defined earlier is related to radial mode coupling coefficient kp as


2 = 1+𝜎𝑝
2
  𝐾2
1−𝐾2



IEEE Standards on Piezoelectricity, 176 (1978).

Comparison of results obtained from two approaches





Pb(Zr
Ti	)O
+ x at % of La,

0.57,	0.43	3
where x = 3, 5, 6, 8, 10 and 12


Close agreement between two approaches, and either of the methods are valid for low loss piezoelectric materials
For lossy piezoelectric materials, e.g. ceramic polymer composites one should consider the constants as complex parameters


Shukla et al(2004): Ferroelectrics, 308:1, 67-84

σfecεk11s33121311P

Comparison of results obtained from two approaches




Equivalent circuit analysis	Direct measurement of fs and fp


Development of doped barium zirconate titanate (BZT) based piezoelectric ceramics for acoustic emission sensor applications







Developed for DMRL, Hyderabad, supplied ~400g powder and ~20 sintered discs with density >95%

Piezoelectric response of Cd-doped BCZT ceramics



Salma et al. Ceramics International 51 (2025) 41251–41263




Applications of Piezoelectric Materials


Applications of Piezoelectric Materials




Generators
(millivolts to kilovolts)
Motors
(microns to millimeters)



Hydrophones
Microphones
Gas igniters
Accelerometer
Power supplies
Photoflash actuators
Piezoelectric pens
Impact fuses
Composites
Energy harvesting
Actuators
Loudspeakers
Camera shutters
Buzzers
Ink jet printers
Fish finders
Micropositioners
Valve controllers
Pumps
Video head positioner
Ultrasonic motors
Piezoelectric fans
Relays

Applications contd.







Motor – Generator
(combination devices)

Sonar
Non – destructive testing (NDT)
Medical ultrasound
Resonant devices
(kilohertz to megahertz)
Ultrasonic cleaners
Ultrasonic welders
Filters
Transformers


Piezoelectric Gas Igniter
A piezoelectric crystal is the heart of the gas igniter.
When a strong force is applied on it by means of a spring loaded hammer it produces an electric spark.
Requires no batteries or fuel

Piezoelectric Actuators

Displacement of up to several hundreds of microns with high
accuracy (  0.01 µm)

High Response time on the order of 10 µs.

Generative force as large as 400 kg/cm2

Driving	power	an	order	of	magnitude	smaller	than electromagnetic motors

	

Piezoelectric Motor




SQUIGGLE* Linear Piezoelectric Motor
only 1.55x1.55x6 millimeters


Uses  less  than
0.1    Watt    to
produce 20 grams of force at 5 mm per second.













*Registered trademark of New Scale Technologies, Inc., USA


Auto focusing in camera installed cell phones


Flexure guide

Retracted Lens






Motor

Extended Lens




Courtesy New Scale Technologies, Inc., USA

Piezoelectric Biosensors

Blood, urine and saliva analysis
HIV, Anthrex and Hepatitis detection
Lab on a chip
Work is in preliminary stage at international level

Schematic diagram of a piezoelectric biosensor




Courtesy www.biomed.drexler.edu/technologyportfolio

Acoustic Emission Sensor

Acoustic Emission (AE) can be defined as the vibration or stress waves generated during dynamic process in materials.
AE monitoring system consists basically of a detector or pick-up to detect the material’s noise vibration and convert it to an equivalent electrical signal.

Ultrasound Imaging

After	X-rays,	the	ultrasound	imaging	is	most	extensively	used	technique	in biomedical field.
The ultrasound is a safe, real time, accurate, reliable, portable and cost effective imaging technique.
It is used for characterizing the heart function, monitoring the growth of fetus in womb, locate cyst in liver / kidney, and assess carotid plaques and breast tumor
Ultrasound imaging is less hazardous to soft tissues

Ultrasound imaging

































Acoustic matching layer
Acoustic lens
Coupling layer



A K Shukla, S L Srivastava, Smart Materials : Piezoelectrics, Nova Science Publisher, USA, 2012

Ultrasound Imaging

The ultrasound imaging uses pulse echo technique for imaging of the biological organs.
The piezoelectric materials generate and sense the acoustical signals and, therefore, suited for pulse echo measurements.
The piezoelectric transducer sends the ultrasonic pulse which senses the echoes also from the various obstacles in the path.

Energy Harvesting


The search for environment friendly alternative energy sources is need of the day to overcome future energy problems.
Extraction of energy from the external sources of environment (solar power, thermal energy, wind energy, salinity gradients, and kinetic energy), and storage for further utilization.

Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting
The vibrating strain energy is converted in the electrical energy using a piezoelectric system.
This energy is stored using a rectifier into a capacitor bank up to a pre defined voltage.
Exceeding this voltage, the power is
transferred to the load.

Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting





Acknowledgements

DDP, DST; ARDB, and ER&IPR, DRDO for grant of research projects
Amity University for providing necessary facilities
Late Dr. A R James, SC’G’, DMRL, Hyderabad for VIS measurement for ARDB, DRDO
project
Prof. K Sreenivas, University of Delhi, and Dr. O P Thakur, SC’G’, SSPL, New Delhi for many
useful scientific discussions and support




THANK YOU
